SQL-  Structured Query Language
a programming language Designed to manage relational databases
can ensure integrity and manage big databases
mostly used across web frameworksand database applications

SELECT * FROM celebs this command retrived a table called celebs and all its contents because with the * wildcard selected all collumns of database
fetching 3 colums id, name and age

relational database - is A relational database is a database that organizes information into one or more tables
 table is a collection of data stored in a format of rows and collumns
 data stored in a relational database is of a certain data type 
 datatypes Integers, text, date, real

a statement is a text that is recognised as a valid command and they always end with a semicolon ";"

CREATE TABLE table_name (
   column_1 data_type, 
   column_2 data_type, 
   column_3 data_type
);

CREATE TABLE - is a clause that performs a task and are written in ALL CAPS also known as commands
table_name - this refers to the name of the table
(
   column_1 data_type, 
   column_2 data_type, 
   column_3 data_type
) - is a parameter a list of columns and their data_types

SELECT, FROM  these are clauses
the changes are being applied to table celebs

CREATE statements create new tables in the database

CREATE TABLE celebs (
   id INTEGER, 
   name TEXT, 
   age INTEGER
);
 IN the above code  the CREATE TABLE statement creates a new table
 celebs defines the name of the table
 (id INTEGER, name TEXT, age INTEGER) this is a list of parameters defining the columns inthe relationa database defining column name and it's data type
 1. id is the 1st column in table with stores data as an Integer
 2. name is the second column which stores data as TEXT
 3. age is the third column where the data is stored as Integers

 INSERT statement inserts a new row into the table
 it is used to add new records

 INSERT INTO celebs (id, name, age) 
VALUES (1, 'Justin Bieber', 29);
INSERT INTO is a command that adds the specified row/rows into a table
celebs is the selected table to where rows are to be added
(id, name, age) these are parameters identifying the columns that data will be inserted into
VALUES A COMMAND that indicates the data being inserted

SELECT statements are used to fetch data from a database

eg SELECT name FROM celebs;
SELECT returns all data in the name column of the celebs table.

eg SELECT * FROM celebs;
this query data from all columns in a table with SELECT.
"*" is a special wildcard charecter  allows you to select every column in a table without having to name each one individually

SELECT statements always return a new table called the result set.


Alter
The ALTER TABLE statement adds a new column to a table. You can use this command when you want to add columns to a table

ALTER TABLE celebs 
ADD COLUMN twitter_handle TEXT;

The command above adds a new column twitter_handle to the celebs table
1. ALTER TABLE is a clause that lets you make the specified changes.
2. celebs is the name of the table that is being changed.
3. ADD COLUMN is a clause that lets you add a new column to a table.

twitter_handle is the name of the new column being added
TEXT is the data type forthe new column
4. NULL A special value in SQL that represents missing or unknown data

ALTER TABLE celebs 
ADD COLUMN twitter_handle TEXT; 

SELECT * FROM celebs;

Update
The UPDATE statement edits a row in a table. You can use the UPDATE statement when you want to change existing records.

UPDATE celebs 
SET twitter_handle = '@taylorswift13' 
WHERE id = 4;  this one  updates the record with an id value of 4 to have the twitter_handle @taylorswift13.


1. UPDATE is a clause that edits a row in the table.
2. celebs is the name of the table.
3. SET is a clause that indicates the column to edit.

twitter_handle is the name of the column that is going to be updated
@taylorswift13 is the new value that is going to be inserted into the twitter_handle column.
4. WHERE is a clause that indicates which row(s) to update with the new column value. Here the row with a 4 in the id column is the row that will have the twitter_handle updated to @taylorswift13.


Delete
The DELETE FROM statement deletes one or more rows from a table. You can use the statement when you want to delete existing records. 

DELETE FROM celebs 
WHERE twitter_handle IS NULL;deletes all records in the celebs table with no twitter_handle
DELETE FROM is a clause that lets you delete rows from a table.
celebs is the name of the table we want to delete rows from.
WHERE is a clause that lets you select which rows you want to delete.
IS NULL is a condition in SQL that returns true when the value is NULL and false otherwise.

Constraints

Constraints that add information about how a column can be used are invoked after specifying the data type for a column

CREATE TABLE celebs (
   id INTEGER PRIMARY KEY, 
   name TEXT UNIQUE,
   date_of_birth TEXT NOT NULL,
   date_of_death TEXT DEFAULT 'Not Applicable'
);
PRIMARY KEY columns can be used to uniquely identify the row. Attempts to insert a row with an identical value to a row already in the table will result in a constraint violation which will not allow you to insert the new row.

2. UNIQUE columns have a different value for every row. This is similar to PRIMARY KEY except a table can have many different UNIQUE columns.

3. NOT NULL columns must have a value. Attempts to insert a row without a value for a NOT NULL column will result in a constraint violation and the new row will not be inserted.

4. DEFAULT columns take an additional argument that will be the assumed value for an inserted row if the new row does not specify a value for that column.
